feat: writing varnish chapter (#2254)
rocky-linux/documentation: docs/books/web_services/05-load-balancer-proxies.md

**Knowledge**: :star: :star:  
**Complexity**: :star: :star: :star:  

**Reading time**: 30 minutes

****

### Generalities

Varnish is an HTTP reverse-proxy-cache service, in other words, a websites accelerator.

Varnish receives HTTP requests from visitors:

* if the response to the cached request is available, it is returned directly to the client from the server's memory,
* if it doesn't have the response, Varnish addresses the web server. Varnish then sends the request to the web server, retrieves the response, stores it in its cache and responds to the client.

Providing the response from the in-memory cache improves response times for clients. In this case, there is no access to physical disks.

By default, Varnish listens on port **6081** and uses **VCL** (**V**arnish **C**onfiguration **L**anguage) for its configuration. Thanks to VCL, it's possible to decide what should or shouldn't be transmitted to the client, what should be cached, from which site and how the response can be modified.

Varnish can be extended with VMOD modules (Varnish Modules).

#### Ensuring high availability

Several mechanisms are used to ensure high availability throughout a web chain:

> * if varnish is behind loadbalancers: as the LBs are generaly in cluster mode, they are already in HA mode. A check from the LBs verifies varnish availability. If a varnish server no longer responds, it is automatically removed from the pool of available servers. In this case, varnish is in ACTIVE/ACTIVE mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* if varnish is behind load balancers: as the LBs are generally in cluster mode, they are already in HA mode. A check from the LBs verifies varnish availability. If a varnish server no longer responds, it is automatically removed from the pool of available servers. In this case, varnish is in ACTIVE/ACTIVE mode.
```

> * if varnish isn't behind a LB cluster, clients address a VIP (see Heartbeat chapter), which is shared between the 2 varnishes. In this case, varnish is in ACTIVE/PASSIF mode. If the active server is no longer available, the VIP switches to the second varnish node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* if varnish isn't behind a LB cluster, clients address a VIP (see Heartbeat chapter), which is shared between the 2 varnishes. In this case, varnish is in ACTIVE/PASSIVE mode. If the active server is no longer available, the VIP switches to the second varnish node.
```

* carried by the LB when the flow passes through it (which is the recommended solution: centralization of the certificate, etc.). The flow then passes unencrypted through the datacenter
* carried by an Apache, Nginx or HAProxy service on the varnish server itself, which only acts as a proxy to the varnish (from port 443 to port 80). This solution is useful if varnish is accessed directly.
* Similarly, Varnish cannot communicate with backends on port 443. When necessary, you need to use a nginx or apache reverse proxy to decrypt the request for varnish.

#### How it works

As we saw earlier, in a basic Web service, the client communicates directly with the service via TCP on port 80.

![How a standard website works](img/varnish_website.png)

To take advantage of the cache, the client must communicate with the web service on the default Varnish port 6081.

![How Varnish works by default](img/varnish_website_with_varnish.png)

To make the service transparent to the client, you'll need to change the default listening port for Varnish and the web service vhosts.

![Transparent implementation for the customer](img/varnish_website_with_varnish_port_80.png)

> To provide an HTTPS service, you'll need to add either a loadbalancer upstream of the varnish service or a proxy service on the varnish server, such as Apache, Nginx or HAProxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To provide an HTTPS service, you'll need to add either a load balancer upstream of the varnish service or a proxy service on the varnish server, such as Apache, Nginx or HAProxy.
```

!!! NOTE

    To configure Varnish, please follow the recommendations on this page: https://www.getpagespeed.com/server-setup/varnish/varnish-virtual-hosts.

### VCL language

#### Subroutines

Varnish uses VCL files, segmented into subroutines containing the actions to be executed. These subroutines are executed only in the specific cases they define. The default `/etc/varnish/default.vcl` file contains the `vcl_recv`, `vcl_backend_response` and `vcl_deliver` routines:

```bash
#
# This is an example VCL file for Varnish.
#
# It does not do anything by default, delegating control to the
# builtin VCL. The builtin VCL is called when there is no explicit
# return statement.
#
# See the VCL chapters in the Users Guide at https://www.varnish-cache.org/docs/
# and http://varnish-cache.org/trac/wiki/VCLExamples for more examples.

# Marker to tell the VCL compiler that this VCL has been adapted to the
# new 4.0 format.
vcl 4.0;

# Default backend definition. Set this to point to your content server.
backend default {
    .host = "127.0.0.1";
    .port = "8080";
}

sub vcl_recv {

}

sub vcl_backend_response {

}

sub vcl_deliver {

}
```

> * **vcl_recv**: This routine is called before the request is sent to the backend. In this routine, you can modify HTTP headers, cookies, choose the backend, etc. See actions `set req`..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **vcl_recv**: This routine is called before the request is sent to the backend. In this routine, you can modify HTTP headers, cookies, choose the backend, etc. See actions `set req`.
```

The round-robin director distributes requests to the round-robin backends (alternately). Each backend can be assigned a weighting.

The client director distributes requests according to a sticky session affinity on any header element (e.g. with a session cookie). In this case, a client is always returned to the same backend.

Backends declaration

```bash
backend docs1 {
    .host = "192.168.1.10";
    .port = "8080";
}

backend docs2 {
    .host = "192.168.1.11";
    .port = "8080";
}
```

The `director` allows you to associate the 2 defined backends.

Director declaration:

```bash
director docs_director round-robin {
    { .backend = docs1; }
    { .backend = docs2; }
}
```

All that remains is to define the director as a backend to the requests:

```bash
sub vcl_recv {
    set req.backend = docs_director;
}
```

#### Managing backends via CLI

Backends can be marked as **sick** or **healthy** for administration or maintenance purposes. This action allows you to remove a node from the pool without having to modify the Varnish server configuration (and therefore without restarting it) or stop the backend service.

> View backend status : The `backend.list` command displays all backends, even those without a healthcheck (probe).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
View backend status : The `backend.list` command displays all backends, even those without a health check (probe).
```
